Lab 1: Deploying and Managing F5 Distributed Cloud Web Application Firewall Configuration
=========================================================================================

.. warning :: If you are using multiple labs in one course, understand that
   some steps below may be redundant depending on labs deployed. To gain full
   benefits from this lab, please delete any objects created in your prior lab
   and continue with this lab as all necessary objects will be recreated.

Lab 1 will focus on the deployment and security of an existing hosted
application using F5 Distributed Cloud Platform and Services. This lab will be
deployed in a SaaS only configuration with no on-premises (public or private
cloud) elements.  All configurations will be made via the F5 Distributed Cloud
Console and within the F5 Distributed Cloud Global Network services
architecture.

For the tasks that follow, you should have already noted your individual
**namespace**. If you failed to note it, return to the **Introduction** section
of this lab, follow the instructions provided and note your **namespace**
accordingly. The **Delegated Domain** and the F5 Distributed Cloud **Tenant**
are listed below for your convenience as they will be the same for all lab
attendees.

* **Delegated Domain:** *.lab-sec.f5demos.com*
* **F5 Distributed Cloud Tenant:** https://f5-xc-lab-sec.console.ves.volterra.io

Following the tasks in the prior **Introduction** Section, you should now be
able to access the F5 Distributed Cloud Console, having set your Work Domain
Roles and Skill levels. If you have not done so already, please login to your
tenant for this lab and proceed to Task 1.

**Expected Lab Time: 25 minutes**


Task 1: Configure Load Balancer and Origin Pool
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following steps will allow you to deploy and advertise a globally available
application. These steps will define an application, register its DNS and
assign a target as an origin.

#. Following the **Introduction** section instructions, you should now be in
   the **Web** **App & API Protection** configuration window. If for some
   reason you are not in the **Web App & API Protection** window, use the
   **Select Service** in the left-hand navigation, and click **Web App & API
   Protection** as shown in the *Introduction Section*

#. In the left-hand navigation expand **Manage** and click **Load Balancers >
   HTTP Load** **Balancers**

#. In the resulting screen click the **Add HTTP Load Balancer** in the graphic
   as shown.

   |lab001|

   |lab002|

   .. note::
      *You have defaulted to your specific namespace as that is the only namespace
      to which you* *have administrative access.*

#. Using the left-hand navigation and in the sections as shown, enter the
   following data. Values where **<namespace>** is required, use the name of
   your given namespace.

   * **Metadata:Name ID:**  *<namespace>-lb*
   * **Basic Configuration: List of Domains:**
     *<namespace>.lab-sec.f5demos.com*
   * **Basic Configuration: Select Type of Load Balancer:** *HTTP*
   * **Basic Configuration: Automatically Manage DNS Records:** *(Check the
     * checkbox)*
   * **Basic Configuration: HTTP Port:** *80*

   |lab003|

#. In the current window's left-hand navigation, click **Origins**. In the
   adjacent **Origins** section, under **Origin Pools**, click **Add Item**.

   |lab004|

#. In the resulting window, use the drop down as shown and click **Add Item**.

   |lab005|

#. In the resulting window, enter **<namespace>-pool** in the **Name** field
   and click

   **Add Item** under **Origin Servers** as shown.

   |lab006|

#. In the resulting window, **Public DNS Name of Origin Server** should be
   selected for **Select Type of Origin Server**.

#. In the **DNS Name** field enter the following hostname:

   **demo-app.amer.myedgedemo.com** and then click **Apply**

   |lab007|

#. After returning to the prior window, make sure **Port:** within the
   **Origin Servers** section, under **Origin Server Port** is configured for
   **80**.

#. Leave all other values as shown while scrolling to the bottom and click,
   **Continue**.

#. After returning to the next window and confirming the content, click
   **Apply**.

   |lab008|

   |lab009|

   |lab010|

Task 2: Configure WAF Policy on the Load Balancer
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

The following steps will guide you through adding a Web Application Firewall
(WAF) Policy. These steps will demonstrate various aspects of the
configuration.

#. Continuing in the **HTTP Load Balancer** section, on the left-hand menu
   click on the **Web Application Firewall (WAF)** drop down and select
   **Enable**.

   |lab011|

#. In the resulting **Enable** field drop down, select **Add Item**.

   |lab012|

   .. note::
      *The "shared/base-appfw" policy is in the "shared namespace" which can be
      applied to* *multiple Load Balancer configurations across namespaces,
      reducing policy sprawl.*

#. In the new window's **Metadata** section enter **<namespace>-appfw** for the
   **Name**.

#. Under **Enforcement Mode**, change the mode to **Blocking**.

#. In the **Security Policy Settings** section, click the **Security Policy**
   dropdown.

#. Select **Custom** from the dropdown menu. Additional configurations will
   become available

   |lab013|

   |lab014|


#. In the expanded configuration, in the **Attack Signatures** section use the
   dropdown for **Signature Selection by Accuracy** and select **High, Medium,
   and Low**.

   |lab015|

#. Leaving all other values as default, scroll to the bottom and click
   **Add App Firewall**.

   |lab016|

   .. note::
      *Automatic Attack Signatures Tuning is enabled which engages an automatic
      False Positive* *suppression engine.  Any suppressed events are logged
      within Security Events.*

   .. note::
      *Attack Signatures Staging is disabled.  This can be enabled should an
      Application* *Firewall with new or updated attack signatures be staged
      (monitored) for a period of* *prior to enforcement (blocking).*

#. Returning to the **HTTP Load Balancer** window, scroll (or click in the
   left-hand navigation) to the **Other Settings** section and note the **VIP
   Advertisement** setting.

#. Click **Save HTTP Load Balancer** at the bottom of the **HTTP Load Balancer**
   configuration screen.

   |lab017|

   .. note::
      *The above selection controls how/where the application is advertised. The "Internet"*
      *setting means that this application will be advertised globally from the F5*
      *Distributed Cloud Global Network utilizing Anycast.*

#. In the **HTTP Load Balancers** window, note the application hostname under
   the **Domains** column *(This was done in Task1: Step 4)*.

#. Click the **Action** dots, and then in the subsequent menu **Manage
   Configuration**.

   |lab018|

#. Click **DNS Information** in the left-hand navigation.

   The value for a CNAME is listed under **Host Name**. The associated
   "Default/Tenant IP" is also shown under **IP Address**. The "Default/Tenant
   IP" is uniquely assigned to each F5 Distributed Cloud Tenant. Additional
   Public IPs can be added to the Tenant.

   |lab019|

#. Click **JSON** in the horizontal navigation at the top-left of the screen.
   The JSON payload (or YAML format, from dropdown) provides for the entire
   Load Balancer configuration. This can be used for backup or subsequent
   CI/CD automation operations.

   |lab020|

#. Click **Documentation** in the horizontal navigation at the top of the
   screen.

   The Documentation screen provides details on the F5 Distributed Cloud
   Console API.

   All operations in the F5 Distributed Cloud Platform are API-first. This
   includes all GUI actions and associated audit logging.

#. Click **Cancel and Exit** to return to the **HTTP Load Balancers** screen.

   |lab021|


Task 3: Testing the WAF Policy & Reviewing Event Data
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

You will now perform basic testing of the Web Application Firewall (WAF)
Policy. You will also review the generated event data to make additional
configuration changes.

#. Open another tab in your browser (Chrome shown), navigate to the newly
   configured Load

   Balancer configuration: **http://<namespace>.lab-sec.f5demos.com**, to confirm
   it is functional.

#. Using some of the sample attacks below, add the URI path & variables to your
   application to generate security event data.

   * ``/?cmd=cat%20/etc/passwd``
   * ``/product?id=4%20OR%201=1``
   * ``/../../../../etc/shadow``
   * ``/cart?search=aaa'><script>prompt('Please+enter+your+password');</script>``

#. In the resulting block screens, note the **URL** and the **Support ID**.
   (copy and paste to a notepad or note resource).

   |lab022|

   |lab023|

   |lab024|

#. Returning to the F5 Distributed Cloud Console, use the left-hand menu to
   select **Overview > Performance** section.  This
   dashboard will provide a summary view for all of the configured Load
   Balancers.

   |lab025|

   .. note::
      *As you have not run many requests, summary analytics may not be
      available in the dashboard view yet.*

#. Scroll to the bottom and select your load balancer.

   |lab026|

#. From the **Performance Dashboard** view, using the horizontal navigation,
   click **Requests**.

#. Change the viewable time period from 5 minutes (default) to **1 hour** by
   selecting the dropdown shown, click **Last 1 hour** then click **Apply**.

   |lab027|

   .. note::
      *Security Event data may take 15-20 seconds to populate in the Console. Please force a
      refresh using the Refresh icon next to the Time Period selection in step 6.*

#. Expand one of the requests and note the **Information** tab link. This
   summarizes request details and provides request duration timing.

   |lab028|

#. Click on the **JSON** link to get more data about the request.

#. Click **Add Filter** as shown to see how you can filter by key identifiers.

   |lab029|

#. The resulting **Search** input field and listed **Keys**, can be used to
   filter requests in this view.

   |lab030|

   .. note::
      *The available Key list to search is dynamically updated based on the requests in the*
      *selected time view.*

#. Closing the filters view, note the available **Quick Filters** for Response
   Codes which allows quickly filtering the requests by toggling **on** or
   **off** each response code category.

#. Click the **Forensics** tab on the right side of the view as shown.

   |lab031|

#. The *Forensics* Filter  provides summarized top categories which provides
   quicker analysis of the request log data.  Collapse the **Forensics** view
   when done using the indicated arrow.

   |lab032|

   .. note::
      *Individual forensic categories can be changed using the noted pencil
      icon to surface additional top data details.*

#. Using the left-hand navigation, under **Overview** select
   **Security**.

   |lab033|

#. Review the **Security Dashboard** display (you may have limited data).

   |lab034|

#. Scroll to **Load Balancers** section and click the **<namespace>-lb**
   object.

   |lab035|

   .. note::
      *This is a multi-application view. Here you could get the summary security status of*
      *each application (iw Threat Level, WAF Mode, etc)* and then click into one for more*
      *specific details.*

#. From the **Security Dashboard** view, using the horizontal navigation, click
   **Security Analytics**.

   |lab036|

#. Expand your latest security event by clicking **Events** (might appear as just an **E**) in the upper-left.

   |lab036|

   .. note::
      *If you lost your 1 Hour Filter, re-apply using Task 3: Step 6*

#. Note the summary detail provided **Information** link and identify the
   **Request ID** which is synonymous with **Support ID** (filterable) from the
   Security Event Block Page.

   |lab038|

#. Scroll to the bottom of the information screen to see specific signatures
   detected and actions taken during the security event.

#. Next, click on the **Add Filter** link just under the **Security
   Analytics** title near the top of the **Security Analytics** window.

   |lab039|

#. Type **req** in the open dialogue window and select **req_id** from the
   dropdown.

#. Next, select **In** from the **Select Operator** dropdown.

#. Finally, select/assign a value that matches one of your copied **Support
   IDs** from Task 3, Step 2 as shown.  You can also optionally just paste the
   Support ID in the value field and click **Apply**.

   |lab040|

   |lab041|

   |lab042|

#. You should now be filtered to a single "Security Event", as shown with your
   selected filter. You can expand and review the request as desired using the
   **arrow** icon.

#. Under the **Actions** column, click on the three Action dots (Scroll to
   right).

#. Select **Create WAF Exclusion rule** from the dropdown that appears.

   |lab043|

   .. note::
      *Adding requestor/client to "Blocked or Trusted Clients" is also available.*

#. In the subsequent **Simple WAF Exclusion Rule** window, review the settings
   (which are editable) by scrolling through the window.  The values have been
   auto-populated based on the selected event to be excluded. Note the various
   sections and possible controls.

#. In the **Expiration  Timestamp** field enter a timestamp 10 minutes from now
   at which the exclusion should expire. (helpful when testing/validating). the
   format should be as shown *YYYY-MM-DD HH:MM:SS+00:00
   (2023-05-30T01:21:00+00:00)*. **HH** must be in 24 hour format (there is no
   AM/PM).

   .. note::
      *Timestamps are in GMT*


#. Click **Apply** when complete.

   |lab044|

   |lab045|

   |lab046|

#. Click **Apply** on the **WAF Exclusion Rules** summary screen.

#. Click on **Security Configuration** in the left-hand navigation and note the
   added **WAF Exclusion Rules** configuration.

#. Scroll to the bottom of the **HTTP Load Balancer** configuration window and
   click the **Save and Exit** button.

   .. note::
      *Rerunning the attack you just excluded, you will see that it is no longer blocked*.

   |lab047|

   |lab048|

   |lab049|

Task 4: Understanding Exclusions and Customizing WAF Policy
~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~~

In this task you will come to understand how exclusions are applied. You will
also further customize the WAF policy just built.

#. In the **HTTP Load Balancers** window **(Manage > Load Balancers > HTTP Load
   Balancers)** Click on the three action dots in the **Actions** column then
   **Manage Configuration** from the dropdown menu.

   |lab050|

#. Click on the **JSON** tab in the horizontal navigation as shown and scroll
   to find the **waf_exclusion_rule** section. Observe that the exclusion rule
   is associated with the Load Balancer configuration and not the WAF Policy.

   .. note::
      *This allows for policy reuse and reduces the need for specific application WAF Policies*.

#. Click on the **Close** to return to the prior window.

   |lab051|

#. In the left-hand navigation menu, navigate  to **Manage** section and click
   the **App Firewall** link.

#. On your App Firewall policy **<namespace>-appfw**, click the three dots
   in the **Actions** column and then click **Manage Configuration**.

   |lab052|

#. Click **Edit Configuration** in the top right corner.

#. Use the left-hand navigation and click on **Advanced Configuration**.

   |lab053|

#. Click the drop down menu for **Blocking Response Page** in the **Advanced
   Configuration** section.

   |lab054|

#. Click the dropdown on **Blocking Response Page** and select **Custom** from
   the dropdown.

   |lab055|

#. In the **Blocking Response Page Body** replace the existing text with the
   text provided below. Click **Save and Exit** when completed.

   |lab056|

   Sample Blocking Response Page to be copied:

   .. code:: HTML

      <style>body { font-family: Source Sans Pro, sans-serif; }</style>
      <html style="margin: 0;"><head><title>Rejected Request</title></head>
      <body style="margin : 0;">
      <div style="background-color: #046b99; height: 40px; width: 100%;"></div>
      <div style="min-height: 100px; background-color: white; text-align: center;"></div>
      <div style="background-color: #fdb81e; height: 5px; width: 100%;"></div>
      <div id="main-content" style="width: 100%; ">
      <table width="100%"><tr><td style="text-align: center;">
      <div style="margin-left: 50px;">
      <div style="margin-bottom: 35px;"><br/>
      <span style="font-size: 40pt; color: #046b99;">Rejected Request</span>
      </div><div style="font-size: 14pt;">
      <p>The requested URL was rejected. Please consult with your administrator.</p>
      <p>Your Support ID is: <span style="color:red; font-weight:bold">{{request_id}}</span></p>
      <p><a href="javascript:history.back()">[Go Back]</a></p>
      </div></div></td></tr></table></div>
      <div style="background-color: #222222; position: fixed; bottom: 0px; height: 40px; width: 100%; text-align: center;"></div>
      </body></html>

#. You can rerun an attack from Task 3: Step 2 to see the new custom block
   page.

   |lab057|

**End of Lab 1:**  This concludes Lab 1, feel free to review and test the
configuration.

A brief presentation will be shared prior to the beginning of Lab 2.

|labend|


.. |lab001| image:: _static/lab1-001.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab002| image:: _static/lab1-002.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab003| image:: _static/lab1-003.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab004| image:: _static/lab1-004.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab005| image:: _static/lab1-005.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab006| image:: _static/lab1-006.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab007| image:: _static/lab1-007.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab008| image:: _static/lab1-008.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab009| image:: _static/lab1-009.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab010| image:: _static/lab1-010.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab011| image:: _static/lab1-011.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab012| image:: _static/lab1-012.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab013| image:: _static/lab1-013.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab014| image:: _static/lab1-014.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab015| image:: _static/lab1-015.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab016| image:: _static/lab1-016.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab017| image:: _static/lab1-017.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab018| image:: _static/lab1-018.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab019| image:: _static/lab1-019.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab020| image:: _static/lab1-020.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab021| image:: _static/lab1-021.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab022| image:: _static/lab1-022.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab023| image:: _static/lab1-023.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab024| image:: _static/lab1-024.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab025| image:: _static/lab1-025.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab026| image:: _static/lab1-026.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab027| image:: _static/lab1-027.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab028| image:: _static/lab1-028.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab029| image:: _static/lab1-029.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab030| image:: _static/lab1-030.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab031| image:: _static/lab1-031.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab032| image:: _static/lab1-032.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab033| image:: _static/lab1-033.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab034| image:: _static/lab1-034.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab035| image:: _static/lab1-035.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab036| image:: _static/lab1-036.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab037| image:: _static/lab1-037.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab038| image:: _static/lab1-038.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab039| image:: _static/lab1-039.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab040| image:: _static/lab1-040.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab041| image:: _static/lab1-041.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab042| image:: _static/lab1-042.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab043| image:: _static/lab1-043.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab044| image:: _static/lab1-044.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab045| image:: _static/lab1-045.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab046| image:: _static/lab1-046.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab047| image:: _static/lab1-047.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab048| image:: _static/lab1-048.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab049| image:: _static/lab1-049.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab050| image:: _static/lab1-050.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab051| image:: _static/lab1-051.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab052| image:: _static/lab1-052.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab053| image:: _static/lab1-053.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab054| image:: _static/lab1-054.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab055| image:: _static/lab1-055.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab056| image:: _static/lab1-056.png
   :width: 800px
.. |lab057| image:: _static/lab1-057.png
   :width: 800px
.. |labend| image:: _static/labend.png
   :width: 800px
